= Differences between Vanilla and WtWMS =
This page covers various design changes between Vanilla and WtWMS and why such changes were implemented.
It is meant as both a record for the devs as well as an FAQ for readers. It is not guarenteed to be a complete listing of all changes.

== Characters ==

== Realm & Governace ==

== Warfare ==

== Culture ==

== Pillars and Traditions ==
* "Egalitarian" was relocalized to "Cosmopolitan"
** Viewed as a more accurate name for that Ethos
* For cultures with little attestation, languages are estimated and normally treated as an isolate
** Examples:
*** Corduenian
*** Veneti
* Many traditions have been given an overhaul to prevent certain combinations
** In particular, certain "Heritage Traditions" are set up in such a way to prevent selection during hybridization if the resulting culture is of an incorrect heritage.

== Religion ==

== Faiths ==

----
= Differences between WtWMS-CK2 and WtWMS-CK3 =
This page covers various design changes between CK2 and CK3 in the mod and why such changes were implemented.
It is meant as both a record for the devs as well as an FAQ for readers. It is not guarenteed to be a complete listing of all changes.

== Characters ==

== Realm & Governace ==

== Warfare ==

== Culture ==
* Certain Christian Germanic cultures get Concubines, in keeping with historicity.
* East African cultures get a precision overhaul:
** Sidamic represents all Highland Cushtic-speaking cultures
** Somali represents all Lowland Cushtic-speaking cultures
** Ge'ez is renamed Ethiopian and moved into the East African famliy while retaining a Semitic Language

== Religion ==
* Autocephaly is not supported as a feature in Vanilla CK3 and there are no mechanics for modelling CK2's autocephaly.
** Instead, Autocephaly is a tenet like Rite, and is implemented via decision
*** It can be achieved by a ruler of the faith that reasonably controls most of the counties of a Christian faith that is a rite of another.
* Minor Christian Faiths from CK2 that focused on a singular doctrine like Binitarianism or Pneumatomachi were standardized in terms of tenets
* A number of Gnostic faiths like Valentinianism and Priscilianism were moved to a new Dualist Family inside of Mazdan, depending on its affinity with Christianity
* Most pagan faiths do ''not'' have a patron god decision, as this is now a tenet. The following faiths have patron deities:
** Hellenism
*** Hellenism
** Hinduism
*** Kalashism
*** Shaivism
*** Vaishnavism
*** Kalikula Shaktism
*** Srikula Shaktism
** Bon
*** Old Bon
** Zoroastrianism
*** Khurmazta
** Germanic
*** Germanic Paganism

== Specific Faiths ==
* Christianity
** Arianism no longer supports raiding
*** Reason: There was nothing doctrinally supporting Arianism having raiding; instead, raiding is now a feature of certain Germanic cultures
** Nestorianism no longer gets an implicit bump with Zoroastrians
*** Reason: the Adaptive Tenet covers this well, as well as some custom doctrines like Legal Faith.
** Miaphysitism uses the Pentarchy as holy sites
*** Reason: It, along with Chalcedonianism and Arianism, are the 3 primary contenders for the Imperial faith.
** Insular Celtic uses mongogamy, in line with Vanilla CK3
* Zoroastrianism (Mazdayasna)
** CK3's implementation, especially the shared Head of Faith Mechanic, meant more accuracy and detail could be implemented for Zoroastrianism
*** As the priestly caste had significant sway in Sasanian Persia, most Zoroastrian faiths utilize Theocratic clerical Tradition. A similar argument is made for male-only clergy; women Mowbeds are a recent innovation in Zoroastrianism
* Hellenism
** Concubinage is no longer available by default to Hellenics
*** Reason: Polygamy was not practiced by the Romans as a rule, so it was removed for historical accuracy.
* Amazighism:
** New, African-Centric Holy Sites
