= Turco-Mongol Cultures =
CK3's changes to the map increased county and duchy density in regions of the map that in CK2 were effectively large blobs. This necessitated a significant research into the socio-cultural makeup of the both central Asia and North-East Asia. The primary sources used for developing the history of the Turco-Mongol peoples are [1,2].

== CK2: Known Issues ==

We'll start off with a few notes from CK2 and why things needed overhaul:

* "Gushi", by name and other notes, is correlated with both the [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jushi_Kingdom Jushi Kingdom] and [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tocharian_languages#/media/File:Tocharian_languages.svg Tocharian A]
** It did not, however, extend into the Hexi corridor during the period, as was the case in the CK2 map.
* Chuyue is, more properly, a name of a specific tribe of the [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yueban Yueban/Chuban] state, not a specific culture.
** If anything, the Yueban are the remnant of the [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Xiongnu Xiongnu] people, as per Chinese sources and other analysis [1,2].
* Based on the most recent genetic analysis [3], the Avar people are an offshot of the Rouran people after the conquest of the Rouran Khaganate by the Turkic Khaganate. As such, the avar presence in and around the Aral Sea in 476 appears to be ahistorical.
* Linguistic evidance seems to point to Xianbei and Rouran languages being related, with the Rouran Language similar to Early/Middle Mongolic [4], while Tuoba (Xianbei)/Khitan/Tuyuhun being Para-Mongolic [5].
** As such, under CK3's linguistic/cultural definitions, the Rouran culture should be descended from but also distinct from the Xianbei culture and language

As such, the transition to CK3 is the perfect opportunity to revisit many of these assumptions.

== A Brief Sketch of the History of the Turks and Mongols to AD 476 ==
Part of the issue with mapping Eurasia in the 4th through 8th centuries is the paucity of evidence; in many cases, there is little direct evidence for various cultures and locations; instead, we must rely on secondary and tertiary sources like [2]. Further complicating matters is the fact that nomadic identities were relatively fluid and groups readily mixed and split from one another with ease. Combined with the tendency in Chinese literature to conflate various nomadic groups together, particularly linking the Dingling with the later Tiele peoples <sup><a href="#footnote-1">1</a></sup>, it is very difficult to identify distinct nomadic groups during the period. With all that in mind, the author will give a rough outline of Early Turco-Mongol history, based on his reading (particuarly [1-3].

The earliest Turkic-related groups in North East Asia are the Dinglings [2] and the Xiongnu [1]. The Dinglings existed in the Southern Siberia from Lake Baikal to around the Aral Sea [6]. Post Xiongnu conquest, the Dinglings appeared to mostly assimilate in locations close to the Xiongnu while those beyond (or, at least, further away from Xiongnu control) eventually became the Tiele; this theory helps justify the tendency in Chinese literature to conflate the Tiele and Dignlings, even in the period following Xiongnu conquest.

By AD 476, the Tiele were already beginning the splinter, with the Kirghiz people arising the upper Yenisei basin. To ensure a reasonable split, the Tiele groups east of the Altai mountain range start split into three groups:  the Kirghiz (previously mentioned), the Uriankhai in the Tannu-Ola region, and the Kurykan (proto-Siberian Turks) in the Baikal region. To help explain Vanilla CK3's later Turumism among the Buryats, the Kurykans start as Turumic. The eventual conquest of the Kurykan by later Mongols is the likely genesis of the expansion of Siberian Turks outside the game map, in teh Author's view.

The Xiongnu, as always, remain an enigma; a paucity of evidence combined with conflicting accounts leaves the ethnic and linguistic identity of the Xiongnu a bit of a mystery. In the author's opinion, [1] presents a very congent case that the Xiongnu were proto-Huns and thus should have a Turkic heritage. After the collapse of the Xiongnu confederacy, the Northern Xiongnu migrated away from Xianbei (later Rouran) dominance; these groups eventually split in two, with parts going west (becoming the nucleus of the Huns and Oghur speakers) and another going south (becoming the nucleus of the Xionites/Hepthalites/Huna peoples). Considering the timing, it seems likely the Xiongnu were Oghuric speakers [1] and as such the author assigns Oghuric as the language of the Xiongnu, although a case could be made for other languages.

Given the similarity between the way of life of the Dingling/Tiele and the Xiongnu, the Dingling are given as the genesis of the Shaz Turkic speakers while the Xiongnu are the genesis of the Oghur Turkic speakers.

Because of the extensive adoption of Iranian customs by the Xionites, Xionite provinces remain Scythian pagan instead of Tengrist.

As for the genesis of the Mongols, the Xianbei (who themselves are descended from the earlier Dong-Hu peoples to the East) are the most likely candidates. The later Ninrun/Rouran peoples are descendents of the Xianbei who admixed with the Xiongnu in the Mongolic plain. Based on linguistic evidence [5], it appears the Rouran language was the antecedent of Mongolian, while the Xianbei/Tuyuhun Tuoba language is a para-Mongolic language.

As a final note, the Gokturks have been mentioned as early as AD 439 [7], although specifics did not come until later. Because of the mechanics of how culture works in CK3, the Gokturks are given their own holdings in South Gobi-Altai region as far as Hami.

== Turco-Mongol Landed Title Overhaul ==
Landed titles have been improved. In the regions beyond the Rouran domination (that is, Tuva and lands north, as well as west of Baikal) are reverted to tribal, as the terrain is ill-suited for nomaidic lifestyles. Fictional tribal rulers control the region.

Based on some Chinese sources, a small Tiele group (the Qun tribe) controls the land north of the Tuul River, and further north is a small pocket of Xianbei likely remained, listed under the fictional Yuwen tribe. The Ashina clan controls the Gobi-Altai region, while the Tiele Gaoche clan are the furthest Western group under Rouran domination.

The Tiele tribe has changed dynasties and is under the Fufuluo clan, who would play a role in the collapse of the Rouran Khaganate. The Yueban now have several sub clans (the Chuyue, the Chumukun, and the Chumi) as they did historically.

Finally, the Mogyers were extended slightly into Cumania, given the conflicting reports of precisely where the Mogyer homland was at the time.

== The Tarim Basin and Hexi Corridor ==
The author had difficulty finding resources for the region at the time of the mod. Some things have been decided, however:  the Gushi presence has been restricted to correlate with the known existance of Tocharian A [8], which extends from Karashar to Gaochang. The Juqu Shanshan holding has been shifted to the Tocharians, as the Juqu dynasty had been recently dethroned from Gaochang by AD 476.

From what the author can find, Western Wei holdings probably extended all the way to the Yumen pass, and as such the duplicate Murongs in the Hexi corridor (along with the fictional Gushi rulers) have been removed in favor of Tuoba (Western Wei) holding of the region. Based on what the author can find, the region is split between the sedentary Han and the nomadic Xianbei (who recently moved into the region, displacing the other nomads shortly before the scenario starts.

The Tuoba dynasty, by AD 476 were thoroughly Sinicized and promoted Sinicization, and as such the holders of the Wei Dynasty Western Regions are Han instead of Xianbei from the rule of TuobaWei005 onwards.


== Sources ==
[1] - E. I. Yorulmazoglu, The Turks: The Central Asian Civilization that Bridged the East and the West for over two Millennia - volume 1. Erol I. Yorulmazoglu, 2021.

[2] - D. Balogh, Ed., Hunnic Peoples in Central and South Asia: Sources for their Origin and History. Barkhuis, 2020.

[3] G. A. Gnecchi-Ruscone et al., “Ancient Genomes Reveal Origin and Rapid Trans-Eurasian Migration of 7th Century Avar Elites,” Cell, vol. 185, no. 8, pp. 1402-1413.e21, 2022.

[4] A. Vovin, “A Sketch of the Earliest Mongolic Language: The Brāhmī Bugut and Khüis Tolgoi Inscriptions,” Intern. Journ Eur Linguistics, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 162–197, 2019.

[5] J. Escher and Y. Trachsel, “Shimunek, Andrew: Languages of Ancient Southern Mongolia and North China – A Historical-Comparative Study of the Serbi or Xianbei Branch of the Serbi-Mongolic Language Family, with an Analysis of Northeastern Frontier Chinese and Old Tibetan Phonology,” Asiat. Stud. – Études Asiat., vol. 72, no. 4, pp. 1231–1234, 2018.

[6] “The Peoples of the West,” Washington.edu. [Online]. Available: https://depts.washington.edu/silkroad/texts/weilue/weilue.html. [Accessed: 27-Jun-2022].

[7] D. Christian, A History of Russia, Central Asia and Mongolia, Volume I: Inner Eurasia from Prehistory to the Mongol Empire. London, England: Blackwell, 1998.

[8] Wikipedia contributors, “Tocharian languages,” Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia, 26-Jun-2022. [Online]. Available: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tocharian_languages&oldid=1095031496.

== Footnotes ==
<p id="footnote-1">1 - Compare the tendency of non-Americans to use the term Yankee as synonymous with American, instead of merely for New Englanders</p>

----
