WtWSMS introduces a number of new traditions to the game.

= Tradition Hybrid Categories =
In Vanilla, Vegitarianism and Sacred Hunts/Prolific Hunters could not be combined, even during hybridization.

In WtWSMS, we've extended this to block other certain combinations, namely traditions that would duplicate effects or are intimately tied to specific heritages.

The rest of this section will list traditions that cannot combine during hybridization.

== Body Status Traditions ==
This list contains pairwise unselectable traditions that are related to how one's body status effects inheritence.

* Armenian Traditions
* Byzantine Succession
* Independent Mauraders
* Merciful Blindings
* Roman Succession
* Unblemished Rulership

== Cultural Combat Traditions ==
This list contains pairwise unselectable traditions that are related to specific cultural combat types.

* Eastern Roman Legacy
* Gothic Warfare
* Independent Mauraders
* Vandalic Warfare
* Western Roman Legacy

== Eunuch Status Traditions ==
This list contains pairwise unselectable traditions that are related to the status of Eunuchs.

* Byzantine Succession
* Court Eunuchs

== Monolithic Culture Traditions ==
This list contains pairwise unselectable traditions that are related to cultural monoliths (i.e., traditions that encourage cultures ''not'' to diverge).

* Colonizers
* Hebrew Traditions
* Hellenic Culture
* Hellenizers
* Kemetic Traditions
* Levantine Traditions
* Medio-Persian Traditions
* Romance Culture

== Heritage Traditions ==
This list contains pairwise unselectable traditions that are related to unique cultural traditions and thus cannot be combined. Most also require a specific heritage(s) to select during hybridization as well.

* Armenian Traditions
* Asturian Hierarchy
* Byzantine Succession
* Egyptian Traditions
* Frankish Traditions
* Greek Succession
* Hebrew Traditions
* Latin Succession
* Levantine Traditions
* Persian Traditions
* Roman Succession

= WtWSMS Tradition List =
'''Bold''' Traditions are traditions that are new to WtWSMS while other traditions are modified from Vanilla.

== Realm Traditions ==

{| class="wikitable" width=100%;
! Tradition
! Effects
! Hybrid Category
! Obligatory Requirements
! Optional Requirements
! Preferred Ethos
! Description

<!-- Modified Traditions -->

<!-- New Traditions -->

|- id="Western Roman Legacy"
| '''Western Roman Legacy'''
|
* Unlocks Western Roman Military Innovations
* <span style="color:#005000;font-weight:bold;">-15%</span> Men-at-Arms Recruitment Cost
* <span style="color:#005000;font-weight:bold;">-15%</span> Men-at-Arms Recruitment Maintenance
* <span style="color:#005000;font-weight:bold;">+2</span> Max Size of Heavy Cavalry Regiments
* <span style="color:#005000;font-weight:bold;">+2</span> Max Size of Heavy Infantry Regiments
* <span style="color:#FF0000;font-weight:bold;">-25%</span> Levy Size
* <span style="color:#FF0000;font-weight:bold;">-25%</span> Levy Reinforcement Rate
|
* Cultural Combat
|
* Latin Heritage
| Culture at least 50 Counties in Historical Western Roman Empire
|
* Bellicose
* Cosmopolitan
* Courtly
| ''The military organization of the Roman Empire is still in living memory within this culture. A professional army is favored over levied troops.''

|- id="Tribal Hierarchy"
| '''Tribal Hierarchy'''
|
* <span style="color:#005000;font-weight:bold">+10%</span> Tribal Government Tax Contribution
* <span style="color:#005000;font-weight:bold">+10%</span> Tribal Government Levy Contribution
* <span style="color:#005000;font-weight:bold">+10%</span> High Tribal Government Tax Contribution
* <span style="color:#005000;font-weight:bold">+10%</span> High Tribal Government Levy Contribution
* <span style="color:#FF0000;font-weight:bold;">-10</span> Opinion from level 1 education traits
|
* None
|
* <span style="color:#FF0000;font-weight:bold;">🗙</span> Hereditary Hierarchy Tradition
* <span style="color:#005000;font-weight:bold;">✔</span> Tribal or High Tribal Government
| King with 10 vassals
|
* Courtly
* Spiritual
| ''This culture demonstrates an unusal degree of rigid social organization for a tribal culture, which encourages support for the rulership. Other cultures and socieites, however, will not find this structure so accomidating.''

|}

----
